How I came (repeat 3xs)
Was by way of U-Haul Truck
Two Black women, one older, one younger
Navigating the interstate, the interstices, the inbetweens  of New York, Massachusetts and Rhode Island.

How I came is also the story of how I got lost
Wondering when I would finally be ready to start that graduate degree in Anthropology
Wondering if my inexperienced driving self could handle a U-Haul packed with all my belongings on a rainy 
June morning in 2003.  
Marveling at my mothers composure as she handles map-quested directions

How I came (repeat 3xs)
Really is the story of how I got lost
Imagining what the thing called Brown University would be
Never guessing my connection to its history
John Brown and slavery,
Imagine an African American girl headed to the Ivy League University that slavery built
To the place that graduated Dr. John Hope, who would help found the NAACP, and Crispus Attucks 
Association to serve communities of color.  An association which would later be renamed The John Hope 
Settlement House.  A man who would later become the first Black president of Moorehouse College.

Nervously checking front view, rear view, side view for the phantom car/vehicle/entity
That could effortlessly wreck my journey.
Youre doing well! my mother says in between reveries of road trips taken with the friends of her youth, 
speeding tickets and first cars.
Thanks I say in between clenched bubble gum chewing teeth
got ta get the nerves out somehow.

Hubba Bubba work your magic!
Loosening up on the Mass Turnpike, I got this! I say to myself
Even getting bold enough to comment on the driving of others
What is that chick thinking? Digging in her back seat when her eyes need to be in her front!
And oh no mistah, you keep your tail in your lane.  Dont even think about coming over here!

Ms. Sassy got this driving thing and her laughing story-filled momma on the road,
On the way
To Brown University
Cause we just made it to Rhode Island and Map Quest aint failed us yet.
Rhode Island, the Ocean State, whose climate would rule out agricultural slavery, but whose waterways would 
welcome slave ships and whaling, even as Roger Williams of Providence Plantations was the first to demand 
liberty from England.
Rhode Island and Providence Plantationshow ironic that the Providence Plantation of Roger Williams 
yesteryear would become the primary home of RIs people of color today. Yet not so ironic to know that even in 
2003, more than 100 years after slavery, Black communities in particular would consistently be underserved.
Crossing through overpasses and underpasses
And then
Story-filled Momma lets out a oops, we took the wrong turn!!

How I came (3xs)
Really is the story of how I got lost, mad, and found again.  
Passing through mill towns, only later would I learn how the money from slavery turned into mills, factories, 
processing industries
What kind of place only has three street signs? I fuss out loud.
Must be some insider/outsider stuff, huh? Some ole if you dont know then you dont belong nonsense.
Story Tellin Mama and Sassy Indigosoo close to the promised land and without street signs to guide us
This Trip
Patience TestingWhy dont these people know their own city? Whats up with all this where Dunkin Donuts 
used to be?  When you should really be saying, Where the Black Wall Street used to be.
This Trip
Parking TreacheryHow the heck do you parallel park a U-Haul anyway?
Wearily Arrivingfinally made it to the campus, to the dormitory
Snoring on the pillow mumbling, Bring this grad school thing onI got this
Daylight finds me at Brown University
Staring eye to eye with a moment out of history
Yet past the slave forts, the Doors of No Returns, islands off the coast of Senegal
Was a Cape Verdean woman department secretary
With eyespopping out of her sockets as I throw my arms around her saying
Ive read about you in my college books!!
Oh yeah, its official, Im here yawl, and I got this!