The sky over the defunct light-industrial district was still
the sky, less sublime, but more articulate. And walking
what we witnessed was, like a flickering appetite, the real
end of sunlight, buildings torn out of the earth and forgotten,
the superabundant likenesses of pictured products
collapsed into our dream and over and over in the dark the
flickering appetite now bunched under the ribs. We were
partly in another place. Its hard not to disappear. I pondered
this ritual of crisis and form as my guide and I
walked the unprofitable time of the city, the pools of slowness,
the lost parts. We breached the citys principal at
every moment with our incommensurate yearnings, and in
the quasi-randomness of our route.

Ruined factories rising into fog; their lapsed symmetries
nearly gothic. The abandoned undulations of the vast
mercantile storage facilities, the avenues of thesesooty,
Roman, bluntand down below, the clapboard family
houses with little triangular porticoes, lesser temples in the
scheme, but as degraded. And in these rough and farcical
mirrors, the struggle to recognize a city. By a habitual
process of transubstantiation, some of this struggle was
named the heart. But we wanted the heart to mean
something other than this interminable roman metronome
of failed eros and placation, something more like the surging
modifications of the inventive sky. So we attempted to
notice the economies that could not appear in money: vast
aluminum light sliding over the sea-like lake; the stacks of
disposable portable buildings labeled Women and Men;
decayed orchards gone oblique between parking lots and
the complex grainy scent that pervaded the street. As we
walked we presented one another with looted images, tying
them with great delicacy to our mortal memories and hopes.
It was as if at that hour we became strands of attention that
spoke. In this way we tethered our separate mortalities to a
single mutable surface. This was description, or love. We
must live as if this illusion is our freedom, said my guide.
Freed, we moved into the anxious pause pressing forward,
that pause shown to us in its detailed itinerancy by
every failing surface, every bland or lurid image, each incapable
caress. The world was leaning on us, leaning and
budding and scraping, as if it too was subjected to strange
rules never made explicit.

