I feel I can look through the paintings and narrations, the
sentences and devices of knowledge, the pleasure and
melancholy, through the strange windows with their yellow
light and shadows and curtains in the style of someone
elses childhood. I can begin to see through anothers technique
of forgiveness or introspection.

When I started off towards my guide the bridge seemed
to be made of astonishingly tawdry materials. Branches,
twine, tiny mirrors, smashed crockery, wire, bundled grasses,
living fronds, pelt-like strips, discarded kitchen chairs of
wood their rungs missing, sagging ladders, bits of threadbare
carpet, cheap shiny grating, rusted metal strips,
gilded frames of nothing, lengths of fraying sisal rope,
straw mats unraveling, limp silken roses on green plastic
stems, tattered basketry, twisted papers, flapping plastic
tarps lit from beneath, woven umbrella spokes, stray
asphalt shingles, stained toile de Jouy curtains their
wooden rings rattling, a ticking cot-mattress bleeding
straw, swollen books stuffing the chinks of the swaying
sounding structure, everything knit as if with an indiscernible
but precisely ornate intention which would never
reveal the complexity of its method to the walker. This was
not a bridge I would have chosen to cross. I awoke already
embarqued on the superb structure. There was nothing to
do but continue. What the bridge passed over changed as
I walked. At first, rivers of motor traffic hissing on a black
highway, this with the skewed strangeness of a foreign
highway, sulfur headlamps occasionally emblazoning the
trembling bridge, which by then had become a cradle of
slung planks, their wrist-wide gaps admitting blue-black
silence of a forest, punctuated with the snapping and
crashing of branches and odd whistlings in the wind,
which rocked me also.

I believe that solitude is chaos. I believe that the bridge
came to be swathed in undulating stuff, unknowable fibres
that fluctuated like the dendrites of nerves, in response to
the minute flickering of thought and light and things astral
as well. My fingers stroked its pure oscillation. There was a
sensation of cushioning, of safety, which at the same time
was not different from chaosas if unknowable varieties
of experience would be held gently, suspended in an elastic
breeze. What this experience was I cant sayit was held
by the bridge the way sleep is contained by the person.
Solitude and sleep are autonomous and festal. Gorgeous
structures cradle them. We can approach the structures but
not the substance, which is really more like a moving current.
Then the rippling of fibres converted themselves
again to foliage, as all speech converts itself to foliage in the
night, and I felt this rippling simultaneously all over my
skin. It was not necessary to differentiate the sensations of
particular organs or leaves since this rippling unknit the
proprieties and zones of affectthe entire body became an
instrument played by weather and chance. We are so
honoured to live with chance.

I wished for my guide to join me on this bridge. I dawdled
and sauntered and loitered at its sultry interstices. In
expectation I adjusted my maudlin garments and touched
my hair. Everything around me unbuttoned. Did I cause
this? Perhaps it was dawn, or something lucid. Animals
were crossing. Mules and dogs and cattle. Children too.
Bicycles with devilish horns. The bridge-urchins were at
their card games and games of dice. Some of us were men
and some were women. Some of us cheated. And in this
matter also it was not necessary to differentiate. Some wore
secular velvets and I touched them in passing, then uttered
the velvet syllables. We carried wrapped packets. Some
scattered papers. Some would sing. Maybe one was my
guide. I called out not knowing if my voice would arrive.
The harsh or worried sound simply blended with the

frequency of motion. Was it a name? What could I hear or
follow? The bridge was gently swaying; I wished to receive
and to know my guide. But stronger and newer and more
ancient than that wish was the barely recognizable desire to
submit to the precocity and insecurity of the bridge itself.
Imagine a very beautiful photograph whose emulsion is
lifting and peeling from the paper. There is no longer a
negative. To preserve it you must absorb this artifact
through your skin, as if it were an antique cosmetic comprised
of colloidal silver. You must absorb its insecurity.
Imagine the post-festal table, rinds and crusts and pink
crustacean shells and crumpled stuff smeared with fats and
juices, the guests gone, for a moment the raw morning
utterly silent, your shirt stained with the wine, your face
pulsing with the specific sadness of something you wont
know. Imagine a sound with no context. Only that emotion.
It is not called doubt.

Context has become internal, rather than hovering as a
theatrical outside. Like new cells speak us. We call itself a
name. We call it change and beautifully its swaying as the
new electrical patterns fringe our sight. Everything is tingling.
We forget about Europe. It wont hurt soon. Soon
we will relax. We will walk above polders and marshes and
roads. The clouds are real or painted.

