
Welcome to the sixth grade National Assessment of Educational Progress.

Technological devices, which provide an unfair advantage, are not permitted.
If you are in possession of such a device, including but not limited to, cell phones, iPods, tablets, calculators, white privilege, parents with a college education, or a household annual income above the poverty line, please power it down now and raise your hand.

The proctor will return your device at the end of the testing period.

One: If Peter reads at a rate of two hundred words per minute in the fourth grade of a local private school, and his reading level is growing exponentially, how long will it take Peter to read all seven of the Harry Potter books?

I ask the ESL specialist what resources are available for my students who have just immigrated to the U.S.
She sends me a link to an online language program none of my students can afford.

Two: If Monica reads twenty words per minute in English and thirty words per minute in Spanish, in the sixth grade of the best public middle school in Providence, how long will it take her to read to read the five hundred word article on The Failings of Public Education?

I ask the ESL specialist what resources are available for a student who spent fourth and fifth grade in a refugee camp. She tells me her boss will reach out to the family.

He never does.

Three: Students who are not proficient readers by the end of third grade are four times less likely to graduate from high school by age nineteen.
At poverty, these students become thirteen times less likely to graduate on time.

Multiply by one out of ten high school dropouts spends time in prison, divide by racism, take the square root of reality, subtract irrational numbers and unreal dreams, where will Monica be in five years?

Please put down your pencils and close your testing booklets. Wait silently while the white teacher, who grew up in a wealthy suburb and has never taken a standardized test, collects your materials.
Feels like a cog in the bowels of the things she despises, begins another letter to the ESL specialist who has stop responding.

Gives up and addresses it to herself:

Dear Olivia,

Do not think you know their struggle because you drive into their neighborhood every morning at seven and back to the east side at four.
Do not think you see through the window what they see; you are not looking through the same window. You will never be looking through the same window. It is impossible to shed a heritage of privilege. Examine your reflection in the window.

Do not try to give your students a voice by lending your own.

Your job is not to tell their story, but to be a microphone held to their lips; a stepping stool; a cheerleader.

Olivia, do not stop teaching. Do not move to a school in the suburbs. Do not switch to private education. Do not write an end to this poem, Olivia.

This isnt over.
