Walking Tour
Walking Tour of
Churches on
College Hill.
Intro
Walking Tour
Directions
Water Powered!
BlackstoneHeritageCorridor.org
Providence, RI
Providence
If you think architectural design is a type of puzzle
with rules that constantly change over time, this
guide will be your key to unlocking clues to these
elements that make a building church-like. On
this walking tour of churches and libraries from
three different centuries, you will be walking along
streets that date to the founding of the settlement
of Providence.
Just sixteen years after the landing of the
Mayflower at Plymouth, Massachusetts, Roger
Williams founded a new settlement in what
would become the colony of Rhode Island. This
settlement was named Providence for the act of
God that Williams believed led him to the east side
of the Seekonk River in 1636.
Williams, a thirty year old Oxford educated
minister, had been banished from the Massachusetts
Bay and Plymouth colonies for his newe and dangerous
opinions against the authorities. Of the thirteen
original colonies, only Rhode Island was founded with
the determination that soul liberty, or freedom of
worship, would apply to all people, of all denominations,
and of all beliefs. The novelty of Williams idea was
that he advocated there could be no peace on earth
until all men granted each other the freedom of their
consciences. The danger the orthodox Puritans, as well
as the Church of England, saw in Williams beliefs was
that, in addition to the difficulty of suddenly having to
espouse a lenient behavior, it also required unconditional
separation of church and state. In that era, both notions
were entirely unimaginable to most Puritans.
2
In such a climate of not only freedom from
persecution, but also freedom to choose, change, and
construct ones own beliefs, the Rhode Island colony
more than any other attracted religious refugees of
all denominations. It was as if the settlements had
advertised Dissenters Welcomed. At liberty to
worship, congregations were also free to build their
houses of worship.
Existing physical evidence of a tolerant attitude
that endured for centuries is the variety of places
of worship in a multitude of architectural styles
ornamenting Rhode Islands cities and towns. Each
one, in its own way, tells you it is a religious building.
But sometimes, you will be surprised to learn, a design
your eye recognizes as a church, is not.
Providence 1790
Walking Tour
College hill, Providence

WATERMAN
GEORGE
PROSPECT
MAGEE
BENEVOLENT
BENEFIT
ANGELL
OLIVE
MEETING
CUSHING
BOWEN
LLOYD
BROWN
BROWN
CONGDON
BENEFIT
PRATT
COLLEGE
NORTH MAIN
SOUTH
COURT
WASHINGTON
STAIRS
STEEPLE ST.
WESTMINSTER
WEYBOSSET
POWER
CANAL ST.
S.WATER ST.
SOUTH MAIN
Brown
University
Campus
Rhode Island
School of Design
Campus

Roger
Williams
National
Memorial Prospect
Terrace
Providence River
3
Cathedral of St. John (Episcopal)
271 North Main Street. 1810, Smithfield stone,
brownstone trim. John Holden Greene, architect.
You would never mistake the original building
of the Cathedral of St. John for an office building
or a department store. The tall, sharply pointed
arch windows, plus the stained-glass, give you
the first clues to the buildings purpose. Although
19th century church buildings of the English
Gothic revival style share some decorative elements
with everything from armories and town halls to
picturesque country residences, the tower with a
belfry gives this building its church-like appearance.
Since the 12th century, the emotional message of
the Gothic style, with its entirely vertical emphasis,
has been clear: everything points heavenward. The
clergy supported the Gothic style, original or revival,
as most aptly suited for worship, reasoning that it
provoked spirituality.
Walk up the stairs in front of the diocesan offices,
continue close along the right hand side of the building,
and through the iron gate at the back. Continue up the
path and steps, and turn right on Benefit Street. For the
rest of the tour, follow the map carefully.
1
This walking tour of churches in the College Hill
National Registered Historic Landmark District (part
of which was Roger Williams own back yard) begins
directly across the street from Roger Williams National
Memorial on North Main Street.
The Rhode Island Historical Society
Walking Tour continued
First Baptist Church
75 North Main Street. 1775, timber frame,
wood. Joseph Brown, designer.
This is the Baptists third church building
in Providence, and the oldest in the country. A
transitional
structure, this
is a traditional
meeting house
combined
with a London
church style
steeple. Brown,
a gentleman
architect,
copied the
five-stage
steeple design
from detailed drawing in James Gibbs Book
of Architecture, published in England in 1728.
As much a landmark 200 years ago as it is today,
the religious symbolism of the 185 foot steeple
is sometimes secondary to its usefulness as a
navigational aid by se or by land.
Memorial Hall, Rhode Island
School of Design
Formerly, Central Congregational Church.
226 Benefit Street. 1853-1856, brownstone-faced
brick. Thomas A. Tefft, architect.
With almost no exterior modifications, the
Rhode Island School of Design has adapted the
former Central Congregational Church for reuse
2
3
as a mailroom and snack bar. The twin towers were
damaged and later removed as a result of the Great
Hurricane of 1938. The triple-rounded arch entrance,
and the tall rounded arch windows are clues to the
buildings original religious function.
Romanesque designs are characteristically
solid, heavy, and usually symmetrical. Builders felt
the mass and weight of the sturdy masonry was
a good allegory for the importance of a spiritual
foundation and permanence.
First Unitarian Church
Formerly, First Congregational Church.
301 Benefit Street. 1816, granite.
John Holden Green, architect.
This church was the third built by the
congregation in Providence. A characteristic of the
Baroque style, originally from the late-Renaissance, is
the use of harmonious, yet richly three-dimensional
forms. Under the huge classical pediment on the
faade beneath the tower, Greene placed an enormous
Gothic round-headed, three part lancet (pointed
arch) window. He then flanked the window with four
colossal columns also in a classical design. Finally,
Federal style finials and decorations were added on
every corner and edge, nearly all the way up to the sky.
The visual effect of the combination of
architectural elements is so dramatic that the building
is awe inspiring.
4
4
Ionic column
Style books
published in
the early 1700s
made the art
of architecture
accessible to master
carpenters and
builders throughout
colonial America.
While it wasnt
exactly a paint by
numbers formula
for perfection, the
books inspired some
aesthetic sense
and sophistication
in architecture
beyond the earlier
vernacular, postmedieval
buildings.
A century before,
there would have
been little visual or
structural difference
between a barn,
a tavern and a
meeting house
except for the
furnishings, and
in the case of the
tavern, heat.
Weathervane
Spire
Belfry Stage
Clock Stage
Lantern
Second Octagon
First Octagon
Gallery
Laurence E. Tilley
Walking Tour continued
Manning Hall, Brown University
1834, stucco rubblestone.
James Bucklin, architect.
This Greek revival style building originally
housed a library downstairs and a chapel upstairs.
Used commercially to the extent that the style
eventually was ridiculed by taste makers in the
mid-1800s, today the best of the Greek revival
buildings are among the most powerful designs
on the landscape. Stand next to one of the Doric
columns in the deep shadow underneath the
portico of Manning Hall. You feel the permanence
and strength of the forms.
5
 Robinson Hall, Brown University
Formerly, University Library.
64 Waterman Street. 1875-1876,
polychrome masonry. Walk and Gould, architects.
Built as the university library, Robinson Hall
looks for all the world as if it should have a sacred
function. What first makes you see this as a church?
The pointy-ness of the High Victorian Gothic
design and decoration immediately catches the
eye. The colorful stonework and festivity of the
decorations on Robinson Hall give it the look of a
site of celebration. The domed, octagonal cupola
is another architectural feature automatically
associated with religious, and sometimes
official, buildings. The size and
symmetry of the building is a final hint
that it might be a place where many
people gather inside, rather than a
private residence.
6 First Church of Christ Scientist
71 Prospect Street. 1906-1913, brick and
limestone with terra cotta trim. Hoppin and
Field, architects.
This basilica-sized, copper clad Renaissancestyle
dome and the State House dome are landmarks
on the citys skyline. During the Italian Renaissance
in the 15th and 16th centuries, proportioned and
measured buildings aspired to total refinement
and complete perfection of detail. Built by a
collaboration of architects, scientists, mathematicians,
and intellectuals, backed by the wealth of the
church, the thrilling vision of a flawless and
inconceivably expensive structure was a symbol
for the great importance and influence of a
whole, unified, and perfect churchdom.
7
5
The Rhode Island Historical Society
Walking Tour continued
Congdon Street Baptist Church
15 Congdon Street. 1874, wood frame.
C. F. Wilcox, architect.
This church is an important site in the citys
African American religious history, beginning
with the congregation from the African Union
Meeting House, which stood on
Meeting Street. The Italianate
style, inspired by 16th century
sources from the Tuscan hill
towns surrounding Florence
and later interpreted by an
English sensibility, produced
simply, strong, and typically
asymmetrical designs. The
easily recognized details are
heavy framing, bold trim, and
decoratively capped windows
and doors set against a plain
background surface. Following
close after the decline of
popularity for Greek revival
designs, Italianate buildings
must have seemed enjoyably
picturesque, and substantially less
laden with meaning and portent.
8
6
Return by walking down South Court Street. On your way,
you will pass the Old State House, 1762, on the right-hand
side. At the foot of the hill, turn right on North Main Street. Providence Preservation Society
Directions
Traveling north or south on I-95, take exit 22
(Providence-Downtown) and proceed tonto
Memorial Boulevard. At fourth light turn left
onto Waterman Avenue. Take first left onto North
Main Street. At second set of traffic lights, turn
left onto Smith Street and make first left onto
Canal Street. Parking lot for the Roger Williams
National Memorial is on the left and side.
Along the Way
	 282 North Main Street: See the exhibits at
the Roger Williams National Memorial. Free
admission. Entrance to the free parking lot is
off Canal Street, a one way street, heading south.
Open daily from 9 a.m.  4:30 p.m. For more
information visit www.nps.gov/rowi or call
401-521-7266.
	 21 Meeting Street: Pick up more walking tour
guides for the mile of History along Benefit
Street or downtown Providence, or get the
schedule for guided walking tours at Providence
Preservation Society. Ask for more information
about the religious architecture of other
congregations in Providence. Terraced formal
garden open and free admission. 401-831-7440.
	 The Rhode Island Black Heritage Society has
additional information about African American
churches in the state. 401-751-3490.
	 11 Thomas Street: The Providence Art Club
Galleries open to the public, free admission.
For hours and other information, please call
401-331-1114 or visit www.providenceartclub.org.
	 75 North Main Street: The First Baptist Church is
open for tours, free admission. 401-454-3418.
	 224 Benefit Street: Tour The Museum of Art,
Rhode Island School of Design, and pick up a free
map for a self-guided tour of the RISD campus.
Admission is charged. 401-454-6400.
Congress established the Blackstone River Valley
National Heritage Corridor Commission in 1986,
recognizing the national significance of the region
between Providence, RI and Worcester, MAthe
Birthplace of the American Industrial Revolution.
The John H. Chafee Blackstone River Valley
National Heritage Corridor is an affiliated area of
the National Park Service.
This brochure was developed under the
direction of The Rhode Island Historical Society
in partnership with the Heritage Corridor
Commission.
Special thanks for assistance to the Providence Preservation
Society.
	 251 Benefit Street: Visit the Providence Athenaeum,
1836-1838, free admission. 401-421-6970.
	 15 Hopkins Street: Tour the Governor Stephen
Hopkins House, 1707. Admission charged.
401-421-0694.
	 52 Power Street: At the corner of Benefit Street,
visit John Brown House, 1786-1788. Free parking
off Charlesfield Street. Admission charged.
401-331-8575.
	 70 Congdon Street: The best view of the city is
from Prospect Terrace, a small park just a short way
up Congdon Street. Free admission.
7