Up Next: Downtown Boys are for Dancers, Activists and Punks Alike

From: Providence, Rhode Island

Sounds like: A political dance party where confrontational punk meets furious free jazz

For fans of: X-Ray Spex, Chumbawamba, The Ex, Crass

“Have you heard Downtown Boys? They’re the most important band in America.”
As recommendations go, it was a hard one to brush off. I’m glad I didn’t. It
is rare in 2014 to encounter a group as invested in working on the front lines
of social change as they are in making their own inventive punk racket. Downtown
Boys pump out danceable, sax-riddled anthems that rail against cops and bosses
with critiques that are rigorous, heartfelt and catchy.

What’s more, by engaging directly with radical action in their own community,
they’ve become one of the more vocal and overtly political bands in contemporary
punk. Members Victoria and Joey — who play together in dance side project Malportado
Kids — met while working in the Renaissance Hotel in Providence, and went on to
spearhead a campaign to unionize the workforce in a fight against low pay and
exploitative conditions. Joey became a viral YouTube sensation by quitting that
same job in a very spectacular fashion. Victoria became a social worker for the
Rhode Island Public Defender, where she has helped organize against collaboration
between immigration enforcement and local police. Downtown Boys prove that radical
messages transmit fastest when accompanied by unforgettable deliberate action.
This is especially true of the video for their first single “Slumlord Sal” — on
Priests‘ Sister Polygon imprint — a police-hatin’, ass-shakin’ riot of utopian
fantasy.

We spoke to Victoria and Joey about their mission, bringing people together through
dance and critiquing some of the biggest names in punk.

“Our music is a tactic for using a show space as a political education and an
organizing space against cultural oppression.” I have learned so much from the
people in the band about race, sexuality, capitalism, displacement and identity
politics. Not all of us agree on how to confront these things, but we are on the
same page in terms of what is wrong and unjust about structural oppression. Our
lyrics and songs come directly from personal experiences with injustice, body
politics, policing tactics and race issues, so when we confront these things
through our interviews it is very intentional, because it is directly coming
from the art. Our music is a tactic for using a show space as a political
education and an organizing space against cultural oppression. — Victoria Ruiz



“Political music is often cheesy or boring so no one listens to it. It’s ineffective
propaganda.” We like to dance, and so do most of our friends. It’s something that
brings people together. That’s just a good baseline. We aren’t trying to create a
distraction from the awful world, but rather help create a new world inside the
show space, and hopefully inspire folks to go out and do it in the outside world,
too. There’s a power and joy in that, and that goes beyond just going to a club
(which is still awesome and valid). Love and rage together are greater than the
sum of their parts. Political music is often cheesy or boring, so no one listens
to it. It’s ineffective propaganda. As much as we hate on aesthetics by themselves,
they obviously matter. I was just tonight looking at a book of El Lissitzky posters,
and Jesus Christ…Consider what happens when you put politics and aesthetics together
like he did. It’s so powerful. — Joey L DeFrancesco

“There is a person [at the show] who looks likes I did when I was 16 — nerdy, brown
and dirtying the cultural hegemonic brainwash.” Every time we play, I think that we
are going pretty deep down into the darkest and brightest places of ourselves,
pulling out emotions from our subconscious and conscious desires, dreams and future.
We are trying to relate to people. A lot of us in the band have worked in relational
organizing, where you build relationships with people in order to create demand for
change. It is the same thing with people at shows. We hope to meet people where they
are at. It is crazy to look to the audience and be like, ‘Wow — there is a person
here singing the lyrics louder than I am, there is a person here slowly unfolding
their arms and slowly moving their head, there is a person here who looks likes I did
when I was 16 — nerdy, brown and dirtying the cultural hegemonic brainwash.’
[At our shows] I want people to be with us and feel completely relevant and important.
— Ruiz

“We love Fugazi and Minor Threat, but they definitely propagated this punk lifestyle
individualism that we’re grappling with now.” I often think about that Fugazi line,
“Never mind what’s been selling, it’s what you’re buying.” Fuck that — it doesn’t
really matter what you’re buying either. It matters what we’re doing to organize and
fight back against power structures. We’re not going to win anything with disorganized
consumer decisions. This is definitely a problem. We love Fugazi and Minor Threat, but
they definitely propagated this punk lifestyle individualism that we’re grappling with
now. What capital wants is this individualized lifestyle activism. It’s fine, it can be
part of personal liberation, but it isn’t where we’re going to win. Do that stuff, but
also get out to the picket line. Get to the Gaza solidarity march. Organize your
co-workers to take on your boss. — DeFrancesco

When someone decides to limit politics, it literally creates a border. The political is
an inherent condition. We want it to be more Fugazi-an to recognize and fight racism and
queerphobia on our streets, classrooms, courtroom and work site than it is to have a sweet
blog or think today’s punks “aren’t like they used to be.” We want it to be Crass-ian to
sell fruit and arroz con leche on the street of a country you weren’t born in and send
money home to your husband and kids in your home country where you can no longer live
because foreign policies have killed your chance for survival. — Ruiz



“We’re at a point culturally where to be subtle is to guarantee appropriation by hip
neoliberal capital.” We have things we want and need to see change in the world, and
we’re not going to get those things by being subtle. A hundred years ago symbols and
aesthetics could be dangerous, but it’s a different historical moment. We’re at a point
culturally where to be subtle is to guarantee appropriation by hip neoliberal capital.
You can talk about revolution in Hunger Games and it means nothing. There’s a restaurant
in Providence called “Cuban Revolution” that has a giant banner outside of it that says
“The Revolution is Now.” It means nothing. Capital has done a remarkable job of defanging
both resistance and young people, by packaging up rebellion as an individualistic lifestyle
choice that’s mostly about making “alternative” consumer decisions. We don’t want to be a
part of that, and so we say what we mean very directly and seriously.
— DeFrancesco

“I’m about to take you on, I’m about to insert so much pain and beauty into you, I’m about
to make you feel very uncomfortable.” Working actively for the power of the people is a
very political action. If punk were not inherently political, then it would probably never
have existed. Punk holds no static definition, but is constantly changing in order to meet
the cultural hegemony where it’s at and to say, ‘I’m about to take you on, I’m about to
insert so much pain and beauty into you, I’m about to make you feel very uncomfortable.’
And then punk produces people like me and you. — Ruiz

