(Once again the plaque on the wall had been smashed. We
attempted to recall the subject of official commemoration,
but whatever we said about it, we said about ourselves.
This way the day would proceed with its humiliating diligence,
towards the stiffening silver of cold evening, when
the dissolute hours had gathered into a recalcitrant knot
and we could no longer stroll in the fantasy that our waistcoats
were embroidered with roses, when we would feel the
sensation of unaccountability like a phantom limb. But it
is unhelpful to read a day backwards.)

My guide raised the styrofoam coffee cup as if it were
the most translucent of foliate porcelains. During the
instant of that gesture morning was all recollection, vestige—
something quite ordinary to be treated with love and intelligence.
From our seat on the still, petal-choked street we
re-conjured the old light now slithering afresh across metropolitan
rooms we had in our past inhabited: rooms shrill
and deep and blush and intermediate, where we had felt
compelled to utter the grail-like and subordinated word
“rougepot” because we had read of these objects in the last
century’s bawdish books; rooms with no middleground,
differently foxed as certain aging mirrors are foxed; shaded
rooms pleasure chose; shabby, faded rooms in which, even
for a single day, our paradoxical excitements had found
uses and upholsteries; rooms of imbrication and elaboration
where we began to resist the logic of our identity, in order
to feel free.

And specifically we recalled the small pinkish room
above the raucous market street, the room whose greenish
sconces had seemed to transmit new conditions for an
entire week. This was the room where, in first light, a
rhythm was generating some sort of Greek Paris, the room
where, still-too-organic, we discovered we could exude our
fumbling as a redundant architecture.

My guide deliberately swirled the final sugars into the
steaming fluid in the cup. “The fragile matinal law makes
room for all manners of theatre and identity and description
of works, the tasting and having, bagatelles, loose-vowelled
dialects—lest we get none in paradise.” We rose from the
wooden bench. We felt limber and sleek and ambitious:
Ready. We agreed to prepare the document of morning.
When we built our first library it was morning and we
were modern, and the bombed windows admitted morning,
which flowed in shafts and tongued over stone. Paper
documents had been looted or confiscated; new descriptions
became necessary. Twelve pixilated scenes from the life of
a teenager replaced walls. The pigments were those of
crushed weeds under skin and just for a moment we left
our satchels leaning on the font.

The satchels, the pixilation, the confiscations: What
actually happened was a deep split, deep in the texture of
mortality. We had been advised in the morning papers that
there was no longer a paradise. Hell also was outmoded.
That is why we were modern. We built this library with an
applied effort of our memory and its arches were the chic
curvature of our tawdry bead necklaces turned up on end.
We laced its hollowness with catwalks, to make use of our
intellectual frivolity. We could survive on these catwalks,
slung across the transept, the emptied stacks, the nave, the
richly carved choir, dangling our little bright plastic buckets
for earthly supplies, and the bombed windows served as
passages for our smoke. Always we were waking suspended
in this cold library, as our neighbours were waking on their
own narrow scaffolds and platforms, performing their slow,
ornamental copulations, and we called our matinal greetings
like larks.

It was a preposterous reverie, borrowing several of its
aspects from stolen engravings we had seen and coveted
and surreptitiously slit from expensive books in order to
furnish the numerous inner pockets of our coats. But we
felt some sort of use had to be made of the abolished heaven.
Since it was redundant, now we could colonize it. Ours
was a fin-de-siecle hopefulness, which bloomed in tandem
with its decay.

The resting point of our long avenue was the shipyard
with its jaunty assemblage of stacked containers. We talked
of the bare co-mixture of stuff and life in the stacked hulls
of freighters, strangers shipped anonymously in containers
among their dying and dead. We had read of this also in
the papers, how in the city’s ports the wracked individuals
had been prised or extruded as mute cargo, living or dead.
They had attempted to migrate into experiment. The
rhetorics of judgement and hope are incommensurate. We
spoke of these rhetorics because morning is overwhelmingly
the experiment of belief. We rise into the failed
library of civitas. We agreed for the moment not to speak
of the nature of the individual tether, the institutes and
lordships and instituted shortages, and certainly this agreement
marked our complicity with the administration of
shortage. But we did not know any other way to go on. We
in no sense expect to be excused from judgement because,
our own ancestral arrivals having receded into the billboards
and whitewash of public myth, we cannot fully
imagine the terribly anulled waking of strangers buried
in the lurching hulls of ships. We wished also to include in
the document our willful ignorance and forgetting, not to
ennoble them but because they exist in a crippling equivalence
with the more doctrinal sentiments, such as pride
and shame.

There we were, nudging the plentiful chimera of the
foreground, maudlin and picturesque in our rosy waistcoats
and our matinal etiquettes —- please? -— of course -— if
only -— my pleasure -— dawdling into the abstract streets. Or
let us say that we were the scribbled creatures who received
the morning’s pronouns and applied them quixotically to
our persons. Perhaps morning simply helped us to feel
somewhat pertinent.

Clangour of the rising grates of shops, rattles of keys, the
gathering movements in the clearer warming air, rhythmic
drawl of trucks of stuff, skinny boys in aprons dragging
bins of fruits, shut markets now unpleating themselves so
that the fragile spaciousness leafed out into commodities.
And this played out to the familiar accompaniment of the
sub-melodic birds of our region, striving away in the
boulevard trees. Yet we could in no way say that the hour
was a development towards a phantom differentiation:
already it contained everything, even those elaborately
balanced sentences that would not reveal themselves until
noon, even the long passivities, even the lilac suckers at
night plunging up. We consulted the morning as a handbook
of exempla as outmoded as it was convivial.

And what did we acquire through the consultation? Was
it dignity or the final limpid understanding of a fashion in
first walk love? Or was it a hint of that suave heaven made from
Europe (slightly mannish, famous for violets and roses,
extra-refined and commodious with stuff)? Obviously we
were confectioners. At least we were not hacking with
random anger at the shrubbery and the absences, dulling
our instruments. Yet we envied that capacity for anger we
witnessed in others. Our own passions often prematurely
matriculated into irony or doubt, or most pathetically, into
mere scorn. We consulted morning also because we wanted
to know all the dialects of sparkling impatience, bloated
and purple audacity, long, irreducible grief, even the
dialects of civic hatred that percolated among the offices
and assemblies and dispatches. We wanted knowledge.

We entered this turbulence in our document as a
blotted, perky line, a sleazy glut and visual crackle in gelatinous,
ridged, and shiny blacks, an indolent pocket where
self and not-self met the superb puberty of a concept. We
understood latency, the marrow. We watched girls with
briefcases enter the architecture, the ones we had seen
juggling fire in the alleys at night. Morning is always
strategic.

Inextricably my guide and I were moving towards
lunch, our favourite meal.
