And so when I began to go on evening walks last fall, I found 
Morningside Heights an easy place from which to set out into the city. 
The path that drops down from the Cathedral of St. John the Divine and 
crosses Morningside Park is only fifteen minutes from Central Park. In 
the other direction, going west, it is some ten minutes to Sakura Park, 
and walking northward from there brings you toward Harlem, along the 
Hudson, though traffic makes the river on the other side of the trees 
inaudible. These walks, a counterpoint to my busy days at the hospital, 
steadily lengthened, taking me farther and farther afield each time, so 
that I often found myself at quite a distance from home late at night, 
and was compelled to return home by subway. In this way, at the 
beginning of the final year of my psychiatry fellowship, New York City 
worked itself into my life at walking pace.

Not long before this aimless wandering began, I had fallen into the 
habit of watching bird migrations from my apartment, and I wonder now if 
the two are connected. On the days when I was home early enough from the 
hospital, I used to look out the window like someone taking auspices, 
hoping to see the miracle of natural immigration. Each time I caught 
sight of geese swooping in formation across the sky, I wondered how our 
life below might look from their perspective, and imagined that, were 
they ever to indulge in such speculation, the high-rises might seem to 
them like firs massed in a grove. Often, as I searched the sky, all I 
saw was rain, or the faint contrail of an airplane bisecting the window, 
and I doubted in some part of myself whether these birds, with their 
dark wings and throats, their pale bodies and tireless little hearts, 
really did exist. So amazed was I by them that I couldn’t trust my 
memory when they weren’t there.

Pigeons flew by from time to time, as did sparrows, wrens, orioles, 
tanagers, and swifts, though it was almost impossible to identify the 
birds from the tiny, solitary, and mostly colorless specks I saw fizzing 
across the sky. While I waited for the rare squadrons of geese, I would 
sometimes listen to the radio. I generally avoided American stations, 
which had too many commercials for my taste — Beethoven followed by ski 
jackets, Wagner after artisanal cheese — instead tuning to Internet 
stations from Canada, Germany, or the Netherlands. And though I often 
couldn’t understand the announcers, my comprehension of their languages 
being poor, the programming always met my evening mood with great 
exactness. Much of the music was familiar, as I had by this point been 
an avid listener to classical radio for more than fourteen years, but 
some of it was new. There were also rare moments of astonishment, like 
the first time I heard, on a station broadcasting from Hamburg, a 
bewitching piece for orchestra and alto solo by Shchedrin (or perhaps it 
was Ysaÿe) which, to this day, I have been unable to identify.

I liked the murmur of the announcers, the sounds of those voices 
speaking calmly from thousands of miles away. I turned the computer’s 
speakers low and looked outside, nestled in the comfort provided by 
those voices, and it wasn’t at all difficult to draw the comparison 
between myself, in my sparse apartment, and the radio host in his or her 
booth, during what must have been the middle of the night somewhere in 
Europe. Those disembodied voices remain connected in my mind, even now, 
with the apparition of migrating geese. Not that I actually saw the 
migrations more than three or four times in all: most days all I saw was 
the colors of the sky at dusk, its powder blues, dirty blushes, and 
russets, all of which gradually gave way to deep shadow. When it became 
dark, I would pick up a book and read by the light of an old desk lamp I 
had rescued from one of the dumpsters at the university; its bulb was 
hooded by a glass bell that cast a greenish light over my hands, the 
book on my lap, the worn upholstery of the sofa. Sometimes, I even spoke 
the words in the book out loud to myself, and doing so I noticed the odd 
way my voice mingled with the murmur of the French, German, or Dutch 
radio announcers, or with the thin texture of the violin strings of the 
orchestras, all of this intensified by the fact that whatever it was I 
was reading had likely been translated out of one of the European 
languages. That fall, I flitted from book to book: Barthes’s Camera 
Lucida, Peter Altenberg’s Telegrams of the Soul, Tahar Ben Jelloun’s The 
Last Friend, among others.

In that sonic fugue, I recalled St. Augustine, and his astonishment at 
St. Ambrose, who was reputed to have found a way to read without 
sounding out the words. It does seem an odd thing — it strikes me now as 
it did then — that we can comprehend words without voicing them. For 
Augustine, the weight and inner life of sentences were best experienced 
out loud, but much has changed in our idea of reading since then. We 
have for too long been taught that the sight of a man speaking to 
himself is a sign of eccentricity or madness; we are no longer at all 
habituated to our own voices, except in conversation or from within the 
safety of a shouting crowd. But a book suggests conversation: one person 
is speaking to another, and audible sound is, or should be, natural to 
that exchange. So I read aloud with myself as my audience, and gave 
voice to another’s words.

In any case, these unusual evening hours passed easily, and I often fell 
asleep right there on the sofa, dragging myself to bed only much later, 
usually at some point in the middle of the night. Then, after what 
always seemed mere minutes of sleep, I was jarred awake by the beeping 
of the alarm clock on my cellphone, which was set to a bizarre 
marimba-like arrangement of “O Tannenbaum.” In these first few moments 
of consciousness, in the sudden glare of morning light, my mind raced 
around itself, remembering fragments of dreams or pieces of the book I 
had been reading before I fell asleep. It was to break the monotony of 
those evenings that, two or three days each week after work, and on at 
least one of the weekend days, I went out walking.

At first, I encountered the streets as an incessant loudness, a shock 
after the day’s focus and relative tranquillity, as though someone had 
shattered the calm of a silent private chapel with the blare of a TV 
set. I wove my way through crowds of shoppers and workers, through road 
constructions and the horns of taxicabs. Walking through busy parts of 
town meant I laid eyes on more people, hundreds more, thousands even, 
than I was accustomed to seeing in the course of a day, but the impress 
of these countless faces did nothing to assuage my feelings of 
isolation; if anything, it intensified them. I became more tired, too, 
after the walks began, an exhaustion unlike any I had known since the 
first months of internship, three years earlier. One night, I simply 
went on and on, walking all the way down to Houston Street, a distance 
of some seven miles, and found myself in a state of disorienting 
fatigue, laboring to remain on my feet. That night I took the subway 
home, and instead of falling asleep immediately, I lay in bed, too tired 
to release myself from wakefulness, and I rehearsed in the dark the 
numerous incidents and sights I had encountered while roaming, sorting 
each encounter like a child playing with wooden blocks, trying to figure 
out which belonged where, which responded to which. Each neighborhood of 
the city appeared to be made of a different substance, each seemed to 
have a different air pressure, a different psychic weight: the bright 
lights and shuttered shops, the housing projects and luxury hotels, the 
fire escapes and city parks. My futile task of sorting went on until the 
forms began to morph into each other and assume abstract shapes 
unrelated to the real city, and only then did my hectic mind finally 
show some pity and still itself, only then did dreamless sleep arrive.

The walks met a need: they were a release from the tightly regulated 
mental environment of work, and once I discovered them as therapy, they 
became the normal thing, and I forgot what life had been like before I 
started walking. Work was a regimen of perfection and competence, and it 
neither allowed improvisation nor tolerated mistakes. As interesting as 
my research project was — I was conducting a clinical study of affective 
disorders in the elderly — the level of detail it demanded was of an 
intricacy that exceeded anything else I had done thus far. The streets 
served as a welcome opposite to all that. Every decision — where to turn 
left, how long to remain lost in thought in front of an abandoned 
building, whether to watch the sun set over New Jersey, or to lope in 
the shadows on the East Side looking across to Queens — was 
inconsequential, and was for that reason a reminder of freedom. I 
covered the city blocks as though measuring them with my stride, and the 
subway stations served as recurring motives in my aimless progress. The 
sight of large masses of people hurrying down into underground chambers 
was perpetually strange to me, and I felt that all of the human race 
were rushing, pushed by a counterinstinctive death drive, into movable 
catacombs. Aboveground I was with thousands of others in their solitude, 
but in the subway, standing close to strangers, jostling them and being 
jostled by them for space and breathing room, all of us reenacting 
unacknowledged traumas, the solitude intensified.




One Sunday morning in November, after a trek through the relatively 
quiet streets on the Upper West Side, I arrived at the large, 
sun-brightened plaza at Columbus Circle. The area had changed recently. 
It had become a more commercial and tourist destination thanks to the 
pair of buildings erected for the Time Warner corporation on the site. 
The buildings, constructed at great speed, had just opened, and were 
filled with shops selling tailored shirts, designer suits, jewelry, 
appliances for the gourmet cook, handmade leather accessories, and 
imported decorative items. On the upper floors were some of the 
costliest restaurants in the city, advertising truffles, caviar, Kobe 
beef, and pricey “tasting menus.” Above the restaurants were apartments 
that included the most expensive residence in the city. Curiosity had 
brought me into the shops on the ground level once or twice before, but 
the cost of the items, and what I perceived as the generally snobbish 
atmosphere, had kept me from returning until that Sunday morning.

It was the day of the New York Marathon. I hadn’t known. I was taken 
aback to see the round plaza in front of the glass towers filled with 
people, a massive, expectant throng setting itself into place close to 
the marathon’s finish line. The crowd lined the street leading away from 
the plaza toward the east. Nearer the west there was a bandstand, on 
which two men with guitars were tuning up, calling and responding to the 
silvery notes on each other’s amplified in- struments. Banners, signs, 
posters, flags, and streamers of all kinds flapped in the wind, and 
mounted police on blindered horses regulated the crowd with cordons, 
whistles, and hand movements. The cops were in dark blue and wore 
sunshades. The crowd was brightly attired, and looking at all that 
green, red, yellow, and white synthetic material in the sun hurt the 
eyes. To escape the din, which seemed to be mounting, I decided to go 
into the shopping center. In addition to the Armani and Hugo Boss shops, 
there was a bookshop on the second floor. In there, I thought, I might 
catch some quiet and drink a cup of coffee before heading back home. But 
the entrance was full of the crowd overflow from the street, and cordons 
made it impossible to get into the towers.

I changed my mind, and decided instead to visit an old teacher of mine 
who lived in the vicinity, in an apartment less than ten minutes’ walk 
away on Central Park South. Professor Saito was, at eighty-nine, the 
oldest person I knew. He had taken me under his wing when I was a junior 
at Maxwell. By that time he was already emeritus, though he continued to 
come to campus every day. He must have seen something in me that made 
him think I was someone on whom his rarefied subject (early English 
literature) would not be wasted. I was a disappointment in this regard, 
but he was kindhearted and, even after I failed to get a decent grade in 
his English Literature before Shakespeare seminar, invited me to meet 
with him several times in his office. He had, in those days, recently 
installed an intrusively loud coffee machine, so we drank coffee, and 
talked: about interpretations of Beowulf, and then later on about the 
classics, the endless labor of scholarship, the various consolations of 
academia, and of his studies just before the Second World War. This last 
subject was so total in its distance from my experience that it was 
perhaps of most interest to me. The war had broken out just as he was 
finishing his D.Phil, and he was forced to leave England and return to 
his family in the Pacific Northwest. With them, shortly afterward, he 
was taken to internment in the Minidoka Camp in Idaho.

In these conversations, as I now recall them, he did almost all the 
talking. I learned the art of listening from him, and the ability to 
trace out a story from what was omitted. Rarely did Professor Saito tell 
me anything about his family, but he did tell me about his life as a 
scholar, and about how he had responded to important issues of his day. 
He’d done an annotated translation of Piers Plowman in the 1970s, which 
had turned out to be his most notable academic success. When he 
mentioned it, he did so with a curious mixture of pride and 
disappointment. He alluded to another big project (he didn’t say on 
what) that had never been completed. He spoke, too, about departmental 
politics. I remember one afternoon that was taken up with his 
recollection of a onetime colleague whose name meant nothing to me when 
he said it and which I don’t remember now. This woman had become famous 
for her activism during the civil rights era and had, for a moment, been 
such a campus celebrity that her literature classes overflowed. He 
described her as an intelligent, sensitive individual but someone with 
whom he could never agree. He admired and disliked her. It’s a puzzle, I 
remember him saying, she was a good scholar, and she was on the right 
side of the struggles of the time, but I simply couldn’t stand her in 
person. She was abrasive and egotistical, heaven rest her soul. You 
can’t say a word against her around here, though. She’s still considered 
a saint.

After we became friends, I made it a point to see Professor Saito two or 
three times each semester, and those meetings became cherished 
highlights of my last two years at Maxwell. I came to view him as a 
grandfatherly figure entirely unlike either of my own grandfathers (only 
one of whom I’d known). I felt I had more in common with him than with 
the people who happened to be related to me. After graduation, when I 
left, first for my research stint at Cold Spring Harbor, and then to 
medical school in Madison, we lost touch with each other. We exchanged 
one or two letters, but it was hard to have our conversations in that 
medium, since news and updates were not the real substance of our 
interaction. But after I returned to the city for internship, I saw him 
several times. The first, entirely by accident — though it happened on a 
day when I had been thinking about him — was just outside a grocery 
store not far from Central Park South, where he had gone out walking 
with the aid of an assistant. Later on, I showed up unannounced at his 
apartment, as he had invited me to do, and found that he still 
maintained the same open-door policy he had back when he had his office 
at the college. The coffee machine from that office now sat disused in a 
corner of the room. Professor Saito told me he had prostate cancer. It 
wasn’t entirely debilitating, but he had stopped going to campus, and 
had begun to hold court at home. His social interactions had been 
curtailed to a degree that must have pained him; the number of guests he 
welcomed had declined steadily, until most of his visitors were either 
nurses or home health aides.

