MARCH 20, 2016 BY THEONEWHOLIKESTOWRITE
Merriam Webster,

We recommend that you add “Columbusing” into the latest edition of your dictionary

Columbusing, verb-white people discovering and glorifying existing things in colored communities.

You, Webster, of course, have the power to give title to this tyranny
Haven’t heard of the term? Just walk around your cities art district

There, I’m sure you’ll be able to find rows of Columbus stores, such as Caribou Coffee, American Apparel, or of course, Urban Outfitters–where you can look like a black person from the 90’s.

Not lookin’ “urban” enough? Head to your nearest thrift store, bumpin’ some Macklemore
Grab all the used over-sized sweaters you can hold, and while swiping your black card don’t forget to chant, “This is fucking awesome!”

You can Columbus just about anything, take music, food, politics

Women empowerment: invented by Lily Allen and Iggy Azaelea
Mexican food: invented by Chipotle
Rock n’ roll: invented by Elvis

And declare it yours, decorate it in dubstep and step all over the history
Even the most patriotic people will scream, “Con las terorsitas!”

But our Harlem shook far before your beat dropped

Our gogo derived from beating buckets and bottles, it was not a joke not a laugh nor drunken jump
It was a sound of uncompromised culture

The noise of our city, before being drowned out by cranes and construction work, it was movement; fluid, shake off the shackles, lend the limbs to the wind

Before 1492, when Christopher Columbus compassed this land and called it his own, people lived here
Before 2000, when metal beasts and business folk compassed our land of D.C. and called it their own, we lived here

They only accident-ed upon discovery; transformed our chocolate city into vanilla bean ice cream
Ran back to Europe, ran back to the suburbs, stepping on our culture screaming “look what I found!”

Columbusing must find its way to the tongues of your readers, American mouths colonize so casually
Bawl vernacular in vocabulary, white-wash it with an accent, black face voice boxes call it “chic”, call it “hip,” never “history”

Columbusing is the way you mock in your dumb down Ebonics, sling our sling right back in our faces
A validity of our vernacular dependent on your definition

Language goes deeper than the syllables they own

This language has been a weapon for the masters, and crosshairs for those who failed to learn punctuation, like our volume ain’t the only exclamation marks we need, like we don’t have indent and restart passages every time we liberate

There’s a difference between being a founder of something, and finding what was already there
There’s a difference between acknowledging our culture as a precedent, and exploiting our lifestyle for dead presidents

Columbus it looks like downtown, it looks like capitol hill, it looks like–the shadows of the Nina, Pinta, and Santa Maria floating down the Delaware river, like injustice binded into the spine of a dictionary that has established “us” as inferior

Merriam Webster, you must adopt “Columbusing” into your dictionary.

Language goes deeper than the syllables they own
Land goes deeper than the flags forked into it.

Our city, our culture, can not be rediscovered.

You cannot find what was never lost.