Blackstone is a predominantly residential neighborhood in Providence, Rhode
Island. It is in the northeast corner of the city and is bounded to the south
and west by Lloyd Avenue and Hope Street respectively. It is one of six
neighborhoods comprising the East Side of Providence.

Blackstone is one of the newest parts of Providence, as the remoteness of its
location and marshy land had precluded significant development before the late
19th century. The area's connection to the rest of the city improved when a
second public horse car line was completed, though it was the completion of the
landscaped Blackstone Boulevard in 1894 that triggered rapid development in the
area. The 20th century saw institutional development in the form of Central
Baptist Church, Temple Emanuel, and St. Sebastian's Roman Catholic Church.
According to the Providence Plan,a local nonprofit aimed at improving city life,
92.5% of residents are white, well above the city-wide average of 54.5%.

Blackstone is one of the most affluent neighborhoods in the city with a median
family income nearly four times that of the city and housing values more than
doubling in recent years. The median household income is $87,727, and the median
family income is $117,522. Only 1.1% of families live below the poverty line.

Blackstone Boulevard Park is a green space between northbound and southbound
lanes of Blackstone Boulevard. It consists of 19.3 acres of parkland and a
1.7-mile jogging/walking path.

Lippitt Memorial Park is located at the intersection of Hope Street and
Blackstone Boulevard near the Pawtucket border.

Butler Hospital, located off Blackstone Boulevard, is Rhode Island's only
private mental health hospital. Founded in 1844, the hospital offers psychiatric
and substance-abuse treatment programs.

Charles is a neighborhood in northern Providence, Rhode Island. Along with
Wanskuck, it comprises what is sometimes referred to as the North End. To the
west Charles is partitioned from Wanskuck by Route 146, while the Chad Brown
public housing complex separates Charles from Smith Hill to the south, and the
West River and Interstate 95 bounds the area to the east. The city limits
abutting the city of North Providence bound Charles to the north.

Until Wanskuck Road (now Branch Avenue) was completed in 1706, Charles's lack of
connections to the more developed part of Providence kept the area sparsely
populated. In 1765, the isolated North End (of which Charles is a part) was
annexed to the neighboring town of North Providence. By the 19th century, the
improvement in infrastructure and proximity to the West River caused
corporations such as the Silver Spring Bleaching and Dyeing Company to move to
the area. With the new industry came an influx of immigrants and an increase in
demand for housing stock. By the end of the century the neighborhood was filled
with one and two family homes of Irish, English, German, Scottish, and Italian
immigrant families, with the largest presence found of the latter. This rapid
growth and development were among the factors that lead North Providence to
return the North End to Providence in 1874.

The neighborhood's connection to the rest of Providence improved further with
streetcar service in 1895. By the 1930s, Charles was densely settled by the
working and middle class. In the latter half of the 20th century, much industry
declined and withdrew from the region, though the effects have been somewhat
mitigated by Providence's attempts to market part of the area as an industrial
park.

For the most part, Charles remains a primarily residential and commercial
neighborhood. Homeownership, unemployment, and income levels remain steady and
the neighborhood remains predominantly white with 52.7% of occupants claiming
Italian ancestry. 16% of residents are Hispanic and 8% are African-American. One
in three children under the age of six speaks a language other than English as
their primary language.[2] The median family income is $36,966, above the
city-wide average of $32,058. 16% of households live in poverty and 7% of
households receive some form of public assistance.

Downtown, also known as Downcity, is the central economic, political, and
cultural district of the city of Providence, Rhode Island. It is bounded on the
east by Canal Street and the Providence River, to the north by Smith Street, to
the west by Interstate 95, and to the south by Henderson Street. I-95 serves as
a physical barrier between the city's commercial core and neighborhoods of
Federal Hill, West End, and Upper South Providence. Most of the downtown is
listed on the National Register of Historic Places as the Downtown Providence
Historic District.